Some people tried to talk about politics only in person because they felt they could better convey their feelings face to face than online. Others would silence themselves or pretend to agree rather than face a conflict. “Like I’m just afraid of being berated, you know. And I don’t want to be berated,” explained Max, 36, of North Carolina. “And I don’t want to dislike you.”

Others, like, Lou, 64, of Florida, reined themselves in when they were offline but felt freer online. “I don’t do conflicts, and I don’t do drama. But when I have the urge to, I’ll go on

Facebook … and get on like a CNN post and, you know, post snarky comments to people that I think are, you know, talking crazy. I don’t do that with people that I actually know.”

Some people steered clear of political talk altogether. This was most pronounced among those who had less polarized views or those who felt their beliefs did not jibe with most people they know.

“I kind of shut down,” noted Julie, of Tennessee. “You know, I, I take the, the attitude of: Okay, this is getting us nowhere.”

But when people who were not very polarized did discuss politics, they often tried to focus on the person and not their political beliefs that they might disagree with.

“A lot of my friends are from very rural areas, and they have very different opinions than I do because I’m kind of from the city,” said 22-year-old Claire, of North Carolina. “…We’ll drink together, and we’ll talk about politics. We’ll eat dinner together, and politics will come up, and we’ll have different opinions, but it’s never a fight. It’s never like, Oh, I don’t like this person because of what they believe. I think that it helps me kind of see things clear and see kind of why people feel that way.”




he knows the person.  “If it’s someone new or someone who I don’t know how they’ll react. .. [I] generally won’t be the person to bring it up. … I don’t know how people will react, and I generally just try to avoid that conflict if I can,” he said.

Another aspect of this strategy, according to our interviews, is not taking comments personally and not defining people based only on their political beliefs. By separating people from their political views, our participants reported they could see past differences and focus on shared humanity.

“I’m from Brooklyn, so I grew up with, I guess, a thick skin,” explained Tim, 33, who now lives in Pennsylvania. “There’s certain things that I know that if … someone is opinionated, I know … it’s just their opinion and that’s it. … It doesn’t make any sense to take things to heart.”

Participants also sought to elicit empathy for their beliefs from those who disagreed with them by sharing stories of their own experiences. “And I said, ‘You know, I’m disabled, too. … Are you calling me a slacker?’” recalled Keith, 59, of Kentucky. “They won’t call me out because now they know a firefighter that, that’s disabled. And it doesn’t jibe with their worldview.”

Explaining a hypothetical situation can sometimes help people see a viewpoint they would not normally embrace, our participants said. Nancy, 42, of Iowa, recalled using a hypothetical situation to explain her support of government social services. “People should work. One, it gives you purpose in life. It gives you drive. It, it rewards you as a person. [It] feels valued and useful. … What if, what if this tragedy happens to you, and you mentally cannot work or physically cannot work. But you have worked. You’ve worked 20 years, and you paid your taxes. Should you not be taken care of by your community in that situation?” she asked.

Find Common Ground
Multiple people we interviewed found that it was easier to talk about divisive topics if they first bonded with people over less polarized issues.

Part of finding common ground is being open to listening to and understanding others’ viewpoints and finding parts to agree with, according to our participants. “Your whole approach, it just has to be open,” noted James, 48, of Alabama. “Like making sure you’re not using anything to, like, blatantly disagree with anybody. Just saying, ‘Yeah, but we can look at it like this’ or ‘I agree with you, but …’”

JoJo, 32, of Florida, said in her family, they try to ask questions to understand each other’s viewpoints. “Well, this is how I feel on it. … Okay, so what’s really best for everybody here?” she said. “…You know, we definitely like to discuss it and see what is actually good for the middle ground.”

Decker, 40, of Illinois, suggested focusing on shared beliefs, rather than party affiliations. “I think party politics construes and confuses the whole thing to the point where no one can know anything, and, so, they just go by the party because the party says … historically Democrats are more liberal, Republicans are more conservative,” he said.

Stick to the Facts and Avoid Confrontation
This strategy focuses on limiting emotion in discussions, sticking to information that can be verified, and avoiding confrontational language. Participants said this approach includes backing up their own opinions with evidence – such as information from news stories from reputable sources – or researching a point before engaging in a conversation.

“So, I try to do a little bit of research and find out if it’s true or fake news or whatever,” said Julie, 66, of Tennessee. “…You just got to, you just got to hope that they’re looking at more than what the talking heads on any of the networks [are saying].”

Avoiding a confrontational tone also helps head off conflict and encourages openness to differing viewpoints, participants said. “Certainly, I think they might respect me more if I’m not, you know, I don’t come off maybe as argumentative or I don’t sound like I’m attacking them,” said Kathleen, 42, of Indiana. “I think they’d be more liable to listen to me if I can, you know, back up what I’m saying and say [it] calmly.”

Sierra, 55, of Washington state, said that it’s